[Music]
you're now both former presidents nobody
plays a song when you walk in the room
anymore
while I didn't bring the coffee how do
you actually say to each other
generally when you say when's this
program going to start and when's it
going to end
you get shorter answers what was the
biggest surprise me the first day you're
in the Oval Office it really surprised
me how easily I could be turned into a
two-dimensional cartoon in walks my dad
and I said welcome mr. president he said
Thank You mr. president
would you fix your time please
well people wouldn't recognize me at
might I was fixed but just leave it this
way all right I don't consider myself a
journalist and nobody else would
consider myself a journalist I began to
take on the life of being an interviewer
even though I have a day job of running
a private equity firm
how do you define leadership what is it
that makes somebody tick so I like to
start by acknowledging the presence of
mrs. Bush thank you very much for being
here
Ashley I was supposed to do that I'm
sorry okay well I when I asked you about
your your parents how are they doing
hate these tough questions thank you for
asking
I told Dad today that I was going to be
on stage with Bill and you were the
moderator what do you say well he was
surprised okay okay
you couldn't surprised you couldn't do
anybody better wasn't available they're
doing well thank you very much I'm
really fortunate to be the only
president with both parents alive after
the presidency and so every day is a
blessing I have your mom and dad alive
and they're doing well 93 and 92 years
old and thank you for asking I'll tell
him you asked okay how is Hillary doing
good we if you knew our grandkids you
know she's good she did really well
she's been working on a book and we
spent every available hour with our
grandchildren and my grandson just
turned a year old on Father's Day Wow
which means every 7 years his father
will celebrate Father's Day on his son's
birthday which is kind of a nice suit
and my almost three year old
granddaughter sang happy birthday to him
at his party can your granddaughter sing
happy birthday and Mandarin no but she
can't sing in Spanish so what what do
you well you both have grandchildren
what are your grandchildren call you
what are your called I'm called jefe
right
what are your grandchildren call you I'm
more humble I'm called pop up all right
none of them call you me you're the one
that told me they once you become a
grandparent you're immediately at the
bottom of the family totem pole you're
the least important person in the family
so we qualified so let's not talk about
this we'll talk about your presidencies
but you're now both former presidents
and what's the difference between being
a former president and president now one
day you have the nuclear codes you can
send nuclear bombs off everybody is
working for you and the next day when
you leave office you have no power what
was the transition like
nobody plays a song when you walk in the
room anymore I mean I was lost for the
first three weeks after I left office I
would kept waiting for the music you
know actually it's wonderful there I've
had almost not a very rarely in 17 years
have I even given a thought to well I
wish I were there I could do this or I
miss this or I think you know you you
have to be grateful for the time you
have and then realize you should focus
on today and the future and I think it's
it's it's both liberating and also it
concentrates the memory you don't know
how many years you got left but you feel
that you the country has given you
something priceless and you owe
something back and so each in our own
way we've tried to figure that out and I
found it a really rewarding part of my
life I've loved it well so I woke up and
Crawford and the day after the
presidency expecting someone to bring me
the coffee Laura didn't bring the coffee
I think the thing that startled me was
the sense of having no responsibilities
in other words during the presidency you
kind of become accustomed to the
responsibility you have first it's
pretty grave and then slowly but surely
it becomes a natural part of your life
and then you wake up the next day and
you have no responsibility and that was
probably the most stunning thing for me
when you're both president when you try
to do something you have somebody on the
opposite political party typically who
says it's a terrible idea and so it's
hard to get things done in Washington
maybe harder than it's ever been now but
hard when you were there as well when
you're a former president do you find
it's easier to get things done
yes depends what you're trying to do
yeah I think it depends first of all you
have to realize what you don't have and
what you do it was it's really true that
I loved the job and I loved all the
responsibilities it's amazing how much
of every day it's taken up by things you
have to do its president and by the
incoming fire and you know when he was
for example running I watched all of his
debates with Al Gore very carefully and
nobody said what are you guys going to
do if al Qaeda blows up the World Trade
Center and you see this in a lot of
different ways and if you don't deal
with the incoming fire it will undermine
your ability to do anything else if all
you deal with is the incoming fire you
can't keep the promises you made when
you were running so it's a lot of
trouble now when you get out you sweat
you change all that power but that
clutter for whatever influence you have
and whatever your experience in contacts
will permit you to do and you have to
decide what to do and everybody makes
different decisions that President
Carter was building habitat houses so
what he decided he wanted to do and by
doing it he helped habitat to grow into
one of the biggest home building
operations in the world so we all had to
make these decisions well former
presidents I don't think it's that easy
frankly to get things done necessarily I
mean for example one of the great
accomplishments of my post presidency
was the building of this building and
the installation of programs that we
think makes it make a difference but it
was hard work to get there was there's
not a appropriations bill well not easy
so but today when former presidents get
together which happens in funerals
unfortunately and also sometimes in
libraries open it's not common that you
get together what is it like in the back
room what do you actually say to each
other when your former presidents are
getting together do you actually tell
secrets that you never tell anybody else
yeah you generally would say when's this
program going to start and when's it
going to end
he'll say to me give shorter answers I
think you know it's unusual with us
because we had because when I was when I
left office I told him I said you know
if I can ever help you and I will do it
if I can't in good conscience I won't
but I'll never embarrass her in public
and you know Hilary was a senator I said
I may have to make some comment that
disagrees with some policy years or not
but I will always do it respectfully
and I want you to succeed and I tried to
be as good as my work and then he gave
me one of the great gifts of my life the
chance to work with his father after the
tsunami in South Asia and then after
Katrina and we had a heck of a time
doing it we did a lot of good and that
brought us all all three of us closer
you ran against President Bush 41 he had
called you names she would call him
names how did you come together he
deserves a lot of credit because if he
hadn't asked us to do this tsunami work
together I'm not sure the relationship
would have ever flowered the way it did
I think it starts with Bill Clinton
being a person who refused to lure his
victory over day
I was he was humble in victory which is
very important in dealing with other
people you ran against President Bush 41
it was a bitter campaign he was defeated
for re-election
how did you manage later to develop a
close relationship wasn't that very
difficult or awkward in times because
you had run against each other he had
called you names you had called him
names how did you come together I think
it helped that we had some contact
before you know I was represented the
Democrat governors when he decided to
embrace these national education goals
and he asked the governor's to help
write them and we started working
together and then I I tried never to
take a cheap shot as in the Governors
Association if we disagreed we said it
went along we found things we could do
together
and I think the other thing is like I
said he deserves a lot of credit because
if he hadn't asked us to do this tsunami
work together I'm not sure the
relationship would have ever flowered
the way it did and we just like being
together and you know you just it's like
anything else
sometimes you click with people and
sometimes you don't I always admired him
I think I completely supported what he
did in the aftermath of the collapse of
the Soviet Union supporting German
reunification supporting the European
Union supporting the efforts he made and
I made with as you see today mixed
results to try to integrate Russia into
the family of democracies and everything
and so we just started working together
on the this tsunami thing was and it's
easy to forget now because it was long
time ago but I mean they lost the
300,000 people in a matter of minutes in
several countries and and then President
Bush said America has got to do our part
most people couldn't find a lot of those
little countries on the map but they
were part of the global community that
he was willing to take our fair share of
responsibility for
that was your relationship with
President Bush 41 but how did you become
close because like I different take on
what I think is one of the most alright
one of the most unique relationships and
an important relationship in US
political history I think it starts with
Bill Clinton being a person who refused
to Lord his victory over dead in other
words he was humble in victory which is
very important in dealing with other
people and and I think dad was willing
to rise above the political contest in
other words it starts with the
individuals character and both men and
my judgment displayed a strong character
and therefore the friendship was able to
be formed now why do I have a friendship
with him look but because he's called a
brother with a different mother he hangs
out north because we you can change that
in Maine more than I do
well when you campaigned you were
campaigning against some of the things
that the Clinton administration had done
I assume when you were running in 2000
yeah probably where were both baby
boomers were and we're both southern
governors we had a lot in common he got
along with people in his legislature I
got along with mine we had friends in
common and so there was a kind of a
natural there was a natural ability to
respect and like each other but
therefore if you disagree with someone
doesn't mean you don't disel you don't
like him right also you know I
recognized that he was 44 days older
than me okay so I called him on his
birthday and I said I'm calling you on
bended knee because this begins my 44
days of respect for my elders when I was
president I would call Bill and you know
he was very helpful and it wasn't you
know it was he knew a lot about a
variety of issues particularly
international affairs that I was
interested in I knew I could count on
him for good advice and and he was
gracious in receiving my calls
President Clinton all of us who've gone
to school recognizes sometime there's
somebody who's the student body
president
the class president and everybody thinks
this person could be president itd
States but none of them actually have
made it except you most people burn out
and they say I don't want to still be a
leader and you've managed to pull this
off what will you think the qualities
were that instill by your mother or well
I also lost two elections along the way
which kind of keeps you humble first of
all I think all that's those kind of way
overrated I I think I got elected
because I was the basically we are the
last generation it was born without a
television I was 10 years old for you
got a television I grew up in a
conversational culture where people
actually talked and listened to each
other and you know I don't know how
these people make it today I mean you
got the average president talks eight
seconds on television snapchats 10
seconds
Twitter's 140 characters I mean you know
we my life revolved around meals and I
had yeah and my father have died you
know in a car wreck before I was born so
I spent a lot of time with my
grandparents and their generation and my
great-uncle was the smartest guy in our
family and he presided over
conversations and he involved the kids
on them and he taught me that
everybody's got a story and most people
can't tell it and that's sad and if
people are Intel inherently interesting
if they can get out of their own waste
so I was taught to listen and to look
and I really think that's what it is I
just cared about I always thought I'd
have a better life I could have somebody
else have a better life too and I liked
it I just got and I got lucky I don't
care what anybody says all these people
who tell you they were both born in a
log cabin they built themselves were
full of bull
now I often think that I was partially
responsible for your being elected
president because I worked in the White
House for President Carter and you may
remember towards the end of your first
term as governor we put a lot of Mario
boat people in Arkansas which may be
impossible for you to get reelected and
I thought that by not being reelected
you were driven so much harder to work
to the presidency later on so yeah I
really appreciate I don't think I've
ever adequately thank you for doing that
okay so at the time you weren't that
happy about it but now President Bush I
think I'm responsible for your being
elected this way I worked in the Carter
White House and I got inflation to 19
percent that enabled President Reagan to
get elected and your father to be vice
president Oakland he probably helped
maybe you become president ever thought
about that
I think Clinton had a bigger role to
play in and you did because I don't
think I ever would have run for governor
had he not defeated dad in 1990 really
yeah it had been very difficult for me
to have beaten and Richards in 1994
because I'd have spent my time defending
George HW Bush who had been in the last
two years of his presidency
oh and by losing it enabled brother Jeb
and me to to be able to kind of run on
her own for governor in our respective
states I was sitting in the Oval Office
at the desk there kind of just taking it
all in and in walks my dad and I said
welcome mr. president he said Thank You
mr. president
what was it like when your mother walked
in the Oval Office the first time in
your the present States she started
laughing out loud
I mean it was so ridiculous you know I
mean the idea of it that it could have
ever happened both of you ran for
Congress the first time you ran and you
both lost so you have that in common but
after you lost the first time you're
trying to beat an incumbent congressman
and you lost did you say I'm out of
politics or what made you say I'm going
to go no well I got a break in a way I
think about won that in the house you
know the Democrats did really well in
1974 in the house races because it was
that for President Nixon resign but I
ran against the congressman who was one
of his father's best friend ran against
John people John he had an 85 percent
approval rating and 99 percent name
recognition
that's called suicide right and I was I
was zero zero and he beat me 51 to 48
threat by 3 points and it's the best
thing that ever happened to me if we
wound up being friends too
but this district we ran in had the
highest amount of gasoline use for
registered vehicle in America because it
was a so rural and all on hilly roads
and you had to do stuff people don't do
anymore your television ads didn't
amount to anything if you didn't do
retail campaigning and I learned 75
percent of what I know about politics in
that first race now were you it was at
that time Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham
then came down and was helping you in
the campaign did did you really think
that at that time that she was going to
stay down in Arkansas and marry you
because you know Arkansas was not
considered in her world the place that
was the centre of this is the universe
exactly I did not know I had I look I
did I had wound up having it one step at
a time I'd already asked her twice to
marry me and she said no all times smart
girl so the third time I said well just
come down here and they liked her so
much at the law school they offer her a
job teaching and so she didn't have
anything else to do her other job was
she was working with the House Judiciary
Committee so when that whole thing was
over she just took the job and it worked
out pretty well well when you got
married you said
why four she said to you I don't want to
ever make any speeches and you've kind
of implied you weren't gonna get in
politics and then oh no not true okay we
got married in November and the next
year I campaigned for Congress okay but
I said she'd never have to give a
political speech and as she did and she
was pretty good at it
I guess it's bigger yeah so when you
lost for your house you ran the house
seat yeah and you lost 78 sure you say
I'm out of politics and for a while but
it turns out like bill said is the best
thing that happened to me and as Ken
hands the guy beat me said if I hadn't
beat Bush he'd still be on the
agricultural committee well when you
decided to run for governor and against
an incumbent and Richards your mother
and father said you have no chance of
winning the father didn't say that the
mother did and what did you say to her
when you won I said who are you going to
come to the inauguration no I look you
know my mother you never like pop off to
her like that otherwise I so feel Floria
so when both of you became president you
know your father had been president you
had not had a father been president but
you've been around government what was
the biggest surprise me the first day
you're in the Oval Office you've learned
the secrets the nuclear codes you learn
all the crises that we might be getting
into what was the biggest surprise that
you found and wanted to hit you that
your present United States all the power
you're the most powerful man in the
world when did it first teach you the
first day the first week the first month
well you know Harry Truman said that the
most amazing thing about being president
is you spend so much your time trying to
talk people into doing things they
should do without your asking them in
the first place but what surprised me
maybe because I was one of his dad's
best gigs on me as I was the governor of
a small southern state that was
factually true and was that you're so
far removed from the American people
that it's hard for them to see you as a
three-dimensional person and I had to
learn all over he even
governor of Texas big as Texas is I
think you had a much more personal
relationship with the people like Bob
Bullock is the lieutenant governor was a
Democrat a very good friend of mine he
loved George Bush and and I think he
helped him be a better government so you
know we were just used to being people
and dealing with people and it really
surprised me how easily I could be
turned into a 2-dimensional cartoon
instead of a three-dimensional human
being and you have to discipline
yourself about what to talk about how to
talk about it and you have to keep
remembering there's all these layers
between you and people that didn't used
to be there and that surprised me I I
thought I was a pretty good communicator
I thought I could you know and I just
fell on my face four or five times so I
figured out how to do it you became
president a very young age you were 46
years old so if you had been present at
56 or 66 you think it would have been
different or you would have less energy
at a jury with more experience how would
you I think I would have been better in
some ways if I'd been over and but I
think I would have been not as good in
some ways because sometimes you get a
bunch done because you're too dumb to
know you can't do it you show up and you
keep trying to do it and something
happens you know you so well your father
of his president so you obviously was
we're in the White House you saw what he
did right and what he might have done
wrong did you take any lessons from that
or were you trying to separate yourself
from your father no I learned a lot from
watching him and and he wasn't
interested in separation from him and he
wasn't anyone interested either we've
got a great father-son relationship and
yeah I learned a lot from watching him
my most startling moment came right
after the inaugural parade I decided I
was going to go in the Oval Office to
see what it felt like and unbeknownst to
me Andy card had called upstairs and the
presidency and asked dad to come in and
so I was sitting in the Oval Office at
the desk there kind of just taking it
all in and in walks my dad and I said
welcome mr. president he
Thank You mr. president put something
what was it like when your mother walked
in the Oval Office to the first time in
your the prezi knighted States she she
started laughing out loud I mean it was
so ridiculous you know I mean the idea
of it that it could have ever happened
and but on the other hand when I started
running she was the only person I
thought I had a good chance to win
nobody else did Hillary and Chelsea were
undecided at the beginning so but it
made me feel good because you know my
mother had a pretty tough life she was
widowed three times and she had a pretty
tough life and she got up at five
o'clock every morning and got herself
ready and was it worked by 7:00 and then
did everything she could to take care of
me and so I was proud to be able to show
it to her and she was ill then but she
lived another year just a little more
than another year about the time and or
excuse me a little less than another
year she died the next year in the sixth
I mean January the 6th so what's it like
to live in the White House I know what
my mother said well I I guess so yeah
good imagine get your feet off the
jeffersonian table but your mother was
proud of course I mean think about this
she's the only there's only one woman
who ever had a son become president I'd
States who father had also been
president States Abigail Adams but I
don't think she was alive when John
Quincy Adams became president so your
mother was the only person who saw her
husband be president and her son pretty
unusual candidate if you could run for
president United States or former
president I States what would you
recommend you've got a little alone time
as a former president to have the impact
on as many people as you can as
president the decisions you make have
got monumental effect
of people and it's it was it's exciting
to be in that kind of environment so
today when you were living in the White
House is it some people call it a kind
of a prison because you really can't get
out pretty much where do you really
enjoy it it's it's a great thing you got
all these servants there and you go to
Camp David when you want is it a
pleasure to live there or not so much I
think if you've lived an informal life
even and oh I'd spent you know almost a
dozen years in the governor's mansion in
Arkansas it's very different I mean if
you've lived and you know if you've been
like God basically was self-supporting
from the time I was 19 and it was it
took some getting used to but I
developed a real respect and affection
for the people that worked there I
developed an enormous amount of respect
for the Secret Service and the risks
they take and I've adjusted myself
accordingly and I love living in the
White House I remember very vividly the
last time I got off of the helicopter
Marine one and walked into the White
House as president before I would soon
be gone and he would be there and I was
consciously aware that I was going in
there more optimistic than I was about
America then the first time I walked in
more idealistic I just I never got tired
of it and did you like living in the way
I did it's great it's really they pamper
you and it's we knew a lot of the staff
they were the same people that worked
there when bill was there and many of
the same when dad was there so we had
gotten to know him when Lauren I got to
know when went to visit but it's it's
great it's really really a historic
place it is it is comfortable I loved
every minute of living there so what
about Camp David most people have never
been to Camp David
so tell us what's it like at Camp David
it's a great place to have a retreat and
relax or is it really overrated no I
liked it I mean it's a great place
particularly
if you I love that most of Thanksgiving
because I bring our family and you know
and I liked it when Chelsea could bring
our friends up there and you have a
little more at least you're under the
illusion that you have while you're on
the grounds more freedom of movement
more wandering around times just it's
great just to get away like I went there
a lot and or we went there a lot and
probably used it more than any president
maybe
Ronald Reagan did more but the reason we
went a lot is one that we could invite
our friends one the great delights of
the presidency was to invite friends we
grew up with in Midland for example and
show them the Oval Office our show on
Camp David but the other thing I liked
about a lot is that I love exercise and
the place is set up for a lot of hiking
running mountain biking there's a
wonderful gym there and it's a it's a
lip around it to be liberating now
mountain biking is a dangerous thing and
you've fallen a couple times may yes
true and but you haven't given it up or
years and I still write it yeah you
don't worry about breaking things now so
your former that's bad jumping out of
Terry's at 85 your exercise is you play
golf but you obviously have lost weight
since you left the presidency you've
gone on a vegan diet
how did isn't that hard to do and less
burgers when you have quadruple heart
bypass and you want to live to be a
grandfather I didn't give it a second
thought I'd say that you know I realized
that I was highly prone to arterial
blockages and I thought I'd cut my
chances I literally wanted to see like a
little to be a grandfather unlike him
who comes from great genes I am now the
oldest person in my family for three
generations man or woman Wow and so I
thought it was I said you know I think
I'd like to hang around I'm kind of
having a good time being alive and I'd
it'll be over sick and sick soon enough
and I think I'll just stretch it out
long as I can so if you could run for
president United States or former
president itd States what would you
recommend first of all I think depends
on what how you keep score but I think
you've got to be former you got to live
a long time as a former
president to have the impact on as many
people as you can as president and I've
tried to do as best I could on that but
if you gave me the choice that service
to terms yeah me too and the reason why
is the decisions you make have got
monumental effect on a lot of people and
it's it was it's exciting to be in that
kind of environment it insists that you
use all your skills and your energy in
order to affect policy in a positive way
the interesting thing about the
presidency is it's often defined by the
unexpected and which makes the job
doubly interesting it's very interesting
now a lot of our most successful former
presidents are wondermint John Quincy
Adams you know what about to Congress
for 16 years and one of one of our most
important anti-slavery advocates William
Howard Taft became chief justice Herbert
Hoover came out of retirement and wrote
the Civil Service Act right they did a
lot of good things and I feel that you
know George and I've been blessed
because we were reasonably young and
Barack Obama is young and so you got you
get the kiddin be double lucky you can
serve eight years as president and then
do some other good things John Kenney
was once I asked their press conference
what do you think about this job and
would you recommend it job and he said
well not to others right now I guess
because I wait so I'm finished my turn
here but would you recommend the job to
people would you say it's worth the
aggravation factor and all the hard work
to become president or would you
recommend they pursue
oh yeah I am saying the highest calling
of mankind I've often thought was
private equity but you would say that
being crazy United States is better than
private equity right I don't know so we
make 200,000 a year in pension what do
you make
when he isn't everything but yes okay if
we could just say one serious thing I
mean I think there are a lot of really
big questions floating around right
there
Carlos Slim Mexican multi-millionaire
he's a really smart guy gave a speech
during the campaign and the campaign
being what it was obviously nobody was
interested in asking about it but he
said I believe that this will be the
first technological revolution that will
kill more jobs than it creates and
therefore I believe we will either have
to have people with money pay even
higher taxes to just subsidize people
living who don't are the richest
countries are going to have to start
planning first for a four day and
ultimately for a three-day workweek
because of automation robotics and
artificial intelligence now no one knows
the answer to that nobody knows if he's
right or not but that means that it's
not going to be boring
what would you say in your eight years
you were most proud of having a gun we
had the broadest period of shared
prosperity in 50 years
what would you say you're eight years
you well my daughter's love me
look back on your presidency both served
18 eight eight years our countries had
roughly 550 million people in our
country's history been Americans 550
million Americans over the course of our
history 45 of them elected president but
only 13 people have served two
consecutive terms and you were two of
the three to 13 so what would you say in
your eight years you were most proud of
having a gun I was most proud that when
I left office we had the broadest period
of shared prosperity in 50 years that is
where the bottom 20% sin come in
percentage terms increased more than the
top 20% and nobody was mad at anybody
else over it it was shared across racial
and religious and regional lines that I
abolished inequality no and you can't in
the market society but at least we found
a way to have more shared prosperity and
including three budget surpluses but I
was I wanted because I think if
everybody's got a decent job and
something to look forward to in the
morning about 90 percent of the other
problems go away
so whatever argument we might have let's
say about health care policy or any
other social policy it will all become
less significant if people think they
can start a business and keep a job and
educate their kids then families are
stable communities are more stable and
all the other problems get smaller what
would you say in your eight years you
well my daughter's love me
it says bill will tell you it's a
challenge to have teenage daughters when
you're the president and it's a talent
any time to have teenage daughters and
thanks to Laura's guidance and love our
little girls our family unit
strengthened and I think that's a great
accomplishment me too and you know what
I think this is what I think a lot of
people don't believe about people like
us if you take it seriously your most
important job until your kids are out of
the house is being a father or a mother
someday wasn't it hard when your present
United States you really have the time
to be a parent as much as you might want
is it kind of hard when you've got all
these people coming at you or is that it
was hard our girls one was a Yale one's
a University of Texas and so they
weren't handy as we say and yeah it's
hard but thankfully Laura spent a lot of
time nurturing them and helping them out
the hardest thing I knew what it's like
to be a child of a president and the
criticisms harsh
regardless who's president and it stinks
if you're the child if somebody you love
yet and criticizes ours we're worried
about our girls reacting to the
criticism that I got and Laura was very
good at comfort me I tried to do my best
what's it like when you have a daughter
and she goes out on a date and the
father is greeting the young man and
you're president United States or you're
governor or president knighted States
what is that it's kind of intimidating
for the young man I assume well at the
time I certainly hope so
I I liked Chelsea's boyfriend's you know
that's it and she never went out with
more than one boy at a time but you know
that chapters got shorter and longer
depending but I remember she had one
boyfriend in high school I really liked
but he wouldn't take his baseball cap
off inside so finally he sat down at
dinner one night and I said I really
like you you know that don't you he said
yes sir I do I said you can't wear that
cap at dinner I'm an old fashioned
person take the cap off this guy goes on
to become an architect and when we when
you put your dad and me to work on
Katrina he was a young person just
started out and I ran into him and
Biloxi working with three of his friends
they got leave from their job and there
they were just three young people down
there trying to help people put their
lives back together that's so I you know
I've treasured knowing my daughter still
brings somewhere between 18 and 25 or 26
people home for Thanksgiving every year
dollar foreign friends who don't
celebrate Thanksgiving or people who
can't go home for Thanksgiving and
Hillary and I we feed them and they go
around the table and say what they're
grateful for every year and it may be if
you you cannot be pessimistic about the
future if you hear young people say that
what makes you both most optimistic
about this country today the future of
our country what makes you most
optimistic and one of the most unique
things about our country are the armies
of compassion that exists throughout the
United States that exists in spite of
the government these are people that say
I want to try to improve the community
in which I live any nation with that
kind of compassion is a nation that in
which the citizenry ought to be
optimistic know when you became former
president one of the things that you are
now famous for doing is taking up
painting correct people work little
surprised because you weren't thought to
be a hardest before so why did you take
up you didn't think I was sensitive
David I mean I please so how did you
decide to paint pick up painting and why
does it give you so much one thing I
hope people do is go down look at the
paintings in the exhibit after dinner
tonight or it's right behind here the
reason I do it because it heralds our
vets I painted because I was bored I
mean this Foundation Institute takes up
time but not enough my exercise program
wasn't taken enough and so I read
Winston Churchill's essay painting is a
pastime and I basically said if that guy
can paint I can paint President Clinton
since you left the presidents you've
changed your your diet and other things
what have you spend the most time now
that gives you the greatest pleasure now
is the Clinton Global Initiative or
building my foundation and trying to
fund it you know it's just that it got
so big so fast that it just took up all
my time but and I'm trying to make it
more entrepreneurial that is I'm trying
to something that once something gets
really big and can fund itself I'm
trying to spin them all off now but that
our health initiative now gives aids
medicine over half the poor people in
the world who got it thanks in no small
measure to him passing PEPFAR even
though we never took any American money
it meant we could help drive the price
of all medicine down everywhere and the
Clinton Global Initiative which we don't
have anymore in its previous incarnation
but I'm working on some specific things
you know we helped 400 million people
with that but it's it takes away it's a
lot of trouble you have to get keep at
it all the time and at first I thought
oh I don't want to do this but I did I
thought you know I'm a workaholic and I
didn't think I could be a gifted painter
but I admired him for doing that and you
know I think he would tell you and the
best thing can happen to you in your
politics is to be consistently
underestimated that's pretty good at
that you might you
he made me a genius because I looked
like a genius because when the
presidential race in 2000 started in
1999 I turn on TV one night to White
House and I saw him sitting on a bale of
hay in a tent in Iowa and as far as I
know it's the first time he made that
concession a conservative speech and I
got on the phone and I said you guys
better pay attention to this he could
beat you there's a big tension against
giving him in any party three terms in a
row in the White House and what he said
to people who could go either way
it's compassionate conservative I'll
give you the same thing Clinton did but
I'd do it with a smaller government the
bigger tax cut wouldn't you like that
and that's it and as we know starting
with me we Democrats is not as good as
bumper stickers and it was brilliant and
I thought they're gonna underestimate
this guy I also saw him beat Ann
Richards had been a friend of mine for
20 years and she had a 60% approval
rating and he won anyway because he
understood that politics was about
candidates conditions and culture and
not just what position you were taking
on the issue and he constructed a
campaign that fit with where Texas was
at that time it didn't have anything to
do you didn't have to dislike Ann
Richards to vote for George Bush so he
maximize the number of people he could
get what do you think it takes for
somebody who says I want to be President
I want to be like you I want to be like
you humility I think it's really
important to know what you don't know
and listen to people who do know what
you don't know if you want to be
President
realize it's about the people not about
you and when it's over and that's what a
lot of these people who are real
arrogant in the office they forget
passes so probably the two of you come
together to create the presidential
leadership program president one of the
real problems with these presidential
centers is that they become irrelevant
pretty quickly unless there's something
that that captures people's attention
and marker spellings Ken's predecessor
said we ought to think about using these
platforms to call young people together
and encourage them through a leadership
education program and it makes a lot of
sense and that bill and I talk together
and it it just fit right into our our
view of how to be useful and and that's
how it got started and then of course
invite and dads and LBJ's made a lot of
sense most people focus their attention
on these libraries on the coasts and
stuff like that there's a valuable
resource for people in in what we call
the heartland
I also think you know one of the you
just talk to these young people here
that basically you know it's a nice
thing to go to our library gives
features and everything I bet you
anything that what the thing they get
most out of is being with each other and
one of the things that's wrong with
America today that bothers me more
anything else about our future is that
we have separated ourselves and two
like-minded communities we may be less
racist homophobic and sexist another
thing but we don't want to be around
very many people who disagree with us
normally and we get news in silos and
the truth is in an interdependent
complex world diverse groups make better
decisions and homogenous ones and so
these people would make better decisions
and everybody knows that but the
elements can't help themselves because
when you get in national elections it
gets more abstracted and we all vote for
the gridlock we say we hate so I think
this is great I was telling George
before we came out here I just came from
Lake Tahoe
where we both I started and he finished
a plan to save Lake Tahoe it's one of
only two blue water lakes in the world
and the Republicans and Democrats on the
ground made it possible because the day
had the end in mind and all we did was
say yes
why just came from Columbia where I
started but he mostly finished Plan
Colombia which gave the country back to
its people it was a total bipartisan
deal because we started with the end in
mind that we got to get back to that in
America this is killing us all this
fighting over nothing instead of saying
what the heck are we trying to get done
we have time for one more question and I
would ask finally both of you could ask
answer this for those who were
Presidential Scholars or other people
watching if somebody wants to be
President I'd states is the quality that
is most important hard work intelligence
optimism luck what do you think it takes
for somebody who says I want to be
President I want to be like you I want
to be like you humility I think it's
really important to know what you don't
know and listen to people who do know
what you don't know I also think you
have to begin with the end in mind that
is you have to say yeah you got to win
the election but why in the heck are you
running that's the other thing I noticed
about him when he ran for governor
against ten Richards he didn't say in
return is a klutz he said I don't want
to be governor because I want to do one
two three things couple of them I didn't
agree with but he had an agenda if you
if you want to be President
realize it's about two people not about
you and when it's over and that's what a
lot of these people who are real
arrogant in office they forget time
passes and it passes more quicker than
more quickly than you know you want to
be able to say people are better off
when I quit kids had a better future and
things were coming together you don't
you don't want to say God look at all
the people I beat are the people I
worked over I think the most important
thing is to be humble to listen to
realize everybody's got a story all the
things I learned is a kitchen the only
thing you disagree with in my place
was that Texas ought to take Arkansas
when I disagreed with is he wanted to
get all of our water not pay very much
money for president I would have swapped
it out for a Texas oil I tell them you
know barrel for barrel President Clinton
President Bush I want to thank you for
your service to our country and to thank
you for the leadership you've given to
so many people and thank you for what
you're doing in your post presidency
thank you very much thank you
[Applause]
[Music]